So we've got, um, James and Ray, have we,
we'll just wait for Jordan Williams to come up on morning.
Mr. Check. He just ask him to accept the promotion.
He's the client that,
Oh, can you hear me?
Yes. Um, Jordan, uh, if you can hear me, you, we need you
to accept the promotion.
Uh, promotion please. Just on Zoom,
It's return now. Okay,
Thanks.
Um, getting a little bit of feedback.
We'll see how it goes. Okay.
Well, welcome to the Taxpayer's Union.
Um, we've set aside, uh, uh,
oh, sorry, 15 minutes reading the wrong line.
15 minutes if you'd like
to present your submission. Uh, good afternoon.
I'm, uh, James, Ross, the policy
and Public Affairs manager at
the New Zealand Taxpayers Union.
Thank you for the opportunity to, uh,
present our submission to you today.
Also got our executive director,
Jordan Williams joining us today
and kicking us off will be Ray Degan, our economists.
Alright, thank you. Uh, good afternoon, Mr.
Chair and members of the committee.
Um, our key message is that for the Parliament Bill,
as it stands, uh, as missing one key aspect,
and that is the application of the Official Information Act
to the parliamentary agencies, uh, all members, uh,
expenditure of public funds and likewise, uh, party leaders
and parties, expenditure of public funds.
The reviews in the past
that created the Official Information Act
and subsequent, uh, law Commission reviews all anticipated
that this would happen, but it hasn't happened yet.
In fact, the Law commission even stated
that such openness would encourage MPS to make better value
for money choices.
And that's a key objective, uh, of the taxpayer's union.
It's our mission. DNA disclosure of the expenditure
of public funds for all members of political parties
to at least the standard demand
of ministers is a no-brainer.
This promotes transparency and
therefore accountability,
which in turn increases trust in members
and the operation of Parliament when revealed
expenditures are justified.
Surprisingly, large expenditures,
which are disclosed quarterly, do not have to be explained
and frequently are not.
This raises suspicions
of inappropriate expenditure of public funds.
This brings members parliament into disrepute.
Similarly, a failure to disclose the details
of party leaders and party expenditures of public funds
raises suspicions of inappropriate
and harms parliament's reputation.
So, as Ray has touched on that, I think our major gripe
with this bill is that it doesn't do enough
to address the accountability issues surrounding, uh,
parliamentary expenditures.
Now, where there's not enough transparency,
there's insufficient accountability,
and where there's insufficient
accountability, there is waste.
We understand this when it comes to ministerial spending.
We understand this when it comes to public servants,
yet we don't seem to have understood this when it comes
to members of Parliament.
Now, Jordan will touch on the 18
and a half thousand ish submissions
that were made demanding this point more in,
uh, more detail later.
But what I'd like to try and demonstrate to you today is
that the, the support for these, uh, amendments
to the bill are significantly more widespread than that even
that would indicate now, we released a poll this morning
that shows that 62% of New Zealanders are in favor
of law change that would see members of parliament's, uh,
expenses and their offices expenses subject
to the same level of scrutiny as ministers.
Now, on the other hand, only 13%,
that's one 3% were opposed.
Now those numbers are staggering.
That's, that's almost a ratio of supporters to, to opposes
of five to one.
Uh, and more interestingly, the supporters across the board,
supporters of every single party in this Parliament Bar
none, were net in favor
of these, uh, legal changes.
And I think, I think the, the very interesting fact is
that when, as soon as you head upside of these,
these four walls, it's just seen as a no brainer
that members parliament's expenses would be subject
to full scrutiny like they are in other countries.
Uh, there's, there's a broad consensus
among voters for this fact.
And as we've touched on it in our written submission,
the experts and the, uh,
researchers have been making the same point
for decades at this point.
Um, you know, if voters agree
and the experts agree, it begs the question why we haven't
seen these reforms yet.
Now, I'm sure everybody in this room
and, uh, everybody in Parliament frankly, agrees
that Kiwis deserve better than secrecy and guesswork,
and there's a real opportunity
to make major lasting reform through this bill.
If, if, uh, if we seize that opportunity.
And if we take it now, frankly, our view is
that there's no time like the present to catch up
with the rest of the world in terms
of scrutiny and transparency.
And this bill provides a real opportunity to do that.
Sure.
Thank you. The opportunity. Apologies.
I'm, I'm, I'm on the country to be able to, um,
appear directly.
Look, the only thing I wanna add is this is a clearly very,
um, popular campaign with our people.
The fact that we were able
to generate nearly 2018 something submissions within
only four days is impressive even to
amount of time's, obviously, the public polling that,
that James has just released.
But, um, also the fact
that more than 200 New Zealanders also said they wanna
present orally, uh, to the committee.
But I warn the committee, this isn't just some popular
union jumping on the bandwagon.
You've also got the Law commission, the original committee,
numerous, various speakers.
I'm, I'm, I'm not sure Mr.
Chair of your position on it, although we soon find out.
But this is one we have, uh, the,
the of the commission.
And I think I'm concerned that if this, uh,
opportunity isn't taken, it'll not just be a on all houses,
uh, it'll leave the impression from the public
that we make no apology, um, for holding the MP
because it only be explained to interest if we don't
new Parliament into with, um, its parliaments all
around the world and have the same transparency on,
uh, spending.
Um, sorry, we
expect you Mr. Webb, rather, uh,
than the transparency we expect from ministers.
And so with that, um, James Ray,
and I'm more than happy to take any questions.
Yeah, Sorry, questions. Please
Honor No, mean I don't have any questions.
That was hard to hear, Jordan, obviously.
But, um, you know, this is a point that's been made
and if you've seen any of the table submissions,
you've seen, it's been repeated several times in various,
from various perspectives, you know, so, um,
and we've interrogated it previously.
So, but thanks for your submission useful. I have read it.
Certainly hope you, I hope you agree with the sentiment.
You're actually really hard to hear. Didn't catch. Yeah.
Didn't, can't Hear. We're getting a lot
of feedback in the background.
It's like, um, yeah, there's,
there's other noise coming through.
However, um, I don't have a question,
but I do have a, a comment.
I thought it was helpful, um, you, uh, submitting,
um, your ideas about what should not be included.
I think that was really helpful
because some of the submissions, um, have kind of,
you should do this, but, um, it hasn't,
they weren't actually specific about, um,
what would be excluded. So,
Well, fortunately, the Law Commission had done
that work, um, prior.
They were very, very, uh, careful to, to try
and create the carve outs of
what was clearly public expenditure from what was
party political activities.
And that was always, and I,
and I, I understand when this was attempted,
when a bill was, uh, introduced, um,
I think in the previous national, uh, um, administration,
it was a bit cumbersome in that area
and, um, didn't really, um, uh,
uh, make it easy to see where the divisions were.
But I think the Law Commission has done, uh,
a really good job in that respect.
Yeah. I, I, I think, you know, some of the submissions
that we've been getting, mps would be worried
about some aspects of the job of being an mp, um, having
to be disclosed that might reveal, um, constituency work, et
Cetera. Oh, look,
complete, completely understand that.
But I think if this committee has a mind
to actually do the work to actually create
that careful carve out, it should be achievable
and it should be achievable to the, to the,
to the satisfaction, um, of all the members of the house.
Our focus is on the financial naturally.
Any, any other questions?
Maria Mineral, we've just heard from the Taxpayers Union.
Have you got any questions? No, thank you.
Sorry, can I, can I just ask one
Question on, on the expense side, the, um, you know,
what is it that you're actually looking for?
I know they're, they're done in, in sort of bulk,
if you like, every, every quarter,
and most of 'em probably unremarkable.
The old surfing trip gets a bit more interesting.
Um, but, you know, are other things you're looking for
that sort of Oh, that one looks a bit odd,
Right? Oh, look,
it's, it's very simply, it's, we are looking
for the same, at least the same level of disclosure
as ministers have to, um, uh, produce on a quarterly basis.
And that's prepared by the Department of Internal Affairs.
And we'd assume that parliamentary services would actually
bear it, uh, for, uh, members expenditures.
And, uh, if you go through, um, uh,
minister's expenditure reports,
you'll see individual invoices
and people can then make up their mind about, you know,
they can actually question a minister if they wanted
to about, uh, what was that invoice for?
It's, it's that level of detail that we're, that, uh,
that we're trying to drive down to.
Um, and, and as the Law Commission said, um,
and, uh, I'll repeat it again.
It's the, it's the expectation that that would make, uh,
members, um, more careful in their expenditures
to make sure that they were value for taxpayers money.
It's the account, it's what we're trying to get to.
One of the core of, uh, our operation is, um,
transparency that provides accountability.
And that's where we are getting to.
Um, and we're not just talking about accountability to, um,
uh, to the wider public.
It's accountability to the voters who vote
to put people in parliament. I
Understand that.
Okay. Thank you. Thank you.
If there's no further question, I want
to thank the Taxpayers Union for your submission
and the answers to our Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, very much thank committee.
Thank you. Uh,
we now have Neville wa be on Zoom,
Mr. Chairman, sorry
to just, uh,
so what does he have to do?
Oh, okay. Hello?
Can you hear me? You can, Neville, can you hear us?
I can hear you well. Can you hear me? Oh,
Yeah, we can hear you just can't see you.
That's okay. We'll, go ahead.
Well, we've got you for, uh, five minutes,
uh, for your submission.
You can be assured that members have read your submission.
Um, if you'd like to leave some time at the end
of your five minutes for questions, it'd be appreciated.
Sure thing, sure thing.
I've actually clicked start my video several times.
I'll just click it once more.
Um, yeah,
and actually I don't even have a copy of my submission
because when I clicked the submit button,
I didn't actually receive a, a, a copy back.
So, but I do remember what I said.
Um, I'm just a member of Joe Public, um,
not representing anybody in particular, just, just, um,
you know, the average Joe Public out there.
But I stand by my comments, um, that I,
that I put in my submission that I can remember, um,
which was based on the levels of accountability
and the recording of, um, members of parliament's expenses,
um, and recording of them individually
by all members, um, and, and open to public scrutiny.
I believe that's essential in an open democracy.
Now, as mps, you are all honorable people.
Let me rephrase that. You're mostly all honorable people,
and as such, you would have to agree that this bill
is not a good look in its present form.
The bill will eventually be known when it's passed
as the Parliament Act, an act of parliament,
obviously a very significant name.
So it should be done properly.
Now, I've had a quick look at the bill.
It's quite a, uh, a lot to read,
but, uh, its purpose at the very beginning as stated
that it's to consolidate and to modernize, et cetera,
and it repeals and replaces for existing acts.
Well, that's fair enough. Uh, I looked up these four acts,
clerk of the House Act 1988, parliamentary Service Act 2000
MP Remuneration and Services Act 2013,
parliamentary Privilege Act 2014.
The mind kind of boggles,
but there's lots of things I obviously don't know.
Uh, for example, the Parliamentary Service Act, I notice
established a thing amongst others
called the Parliamentary corporation.
I assume that there's also things like, you know,
a parliamentary Service chief executive
and a parliamentary service commissioner,
and goodness knows what else.
But, uh, as for
what the Parliamentary corporation is, I have no idea.
So I'm sorry. You know, I may be missing something.
But anyway, part four of this proposed act,
this parliament Bill, it says
that it has a purpose to, uh,
con, as I said, to consolidate and, and modernize.
But it also says that its purpose is
to ensure that members are properly supported
and maintains the confidence in the integrity of parliament.
Now that purpose is actually buried further down,
not at the beginning of the, of the bill,
but down, I think in section 59,
maintaining confidence in the,
in the integrity of Parliament.
Well, that would be a very laudable aim or purpose,
but in my view, it clearly falls down there.
And incidentally, you might need to add a new section
when you go back and redraft this bill.
A section on the standards of behavior for members
of Parliament might be quite good, like, for example,
when they can do Harker and so on.
Now, part four sections 57 to a hundred,
which is a total of 43 sections, no less.
So it covers members of parliament's salaries,
members of parliament's, allowances, annuities,
expenses and services.
Never. That's, I'm gonna have to tell you
that your time is actually up.
If, um, I'm wondering if members have any questions,
we might have time for one.
No, it doesn't appear to be.
Thank you very much for your submission.
It's much appreciated.
Good. Uh,
we now have Anna Mu, um, also on Zoom.
Anna, can you hear me?
Yes, I can. Um, welcome
to the Parliament Bill Select Committee.
Uh, we've allocated you, uh, five minutes.
Um, can be assured that members have read your submission.
Thank you very much. And, uh, you are welcome
to give us the highlights of your submission.
Okay, thank you Koto.
Um, so I'm here today really in response to,
to Jeffrey Palmer's call for citizens to get more involved
with our parliamentary processes.
I was on sabbatical two years ago when the standing orders
were being reviewed.
And, um, so I heard some of his memorable soundbites,
including we are making law here in much the same way
as we did in the 1860s.
Um, he said that legislation should be prepared in a
different way, and the parliamentary council office must
be at the heart of it.
Um, during the last two years, I've gone on to make
personal submissions in relation to a government bill,
a member's bill, and a local bill.
So I do have some lived experiences with, um,
the challenges of these processes.
And I do have real empathy
for the people working in the office of the clerk
and the parliamentary council office, um,
because I have worked as an in-house lawyer
and in secretariat roles in the private sector.
So I really do appreciate the value
and importance of their work.
And I'd like to support the calls for them to be properly
resourced and the concerns
that were raised in earlier submissions
about the quality of their work.
Just, it would be great if this Bill
and Act helps to, um, make the systems hum in the way
that we need for the 21st century.
My very brief written submission submission had one
recommendation, um, proposing
that Clause 103 about the Clark's functions duties
and powers, um, be amended.
So it echoes one aspect of the legislation Act of 2019.
It simply was to add the words in a way that takes account
of changes in technology, um, to
improve the spirit of the legislation that would apply
to the office of the clerk,
and hopefully get those synergies working more effectively
with the parliamentary council office
who are really leading the way, um, perhaps
to make it easier for that recommendation to be interpreted.
I think it's particularly relevant for three
of the points in the 12 point summary
that Sir Jeffrey Palmer
and Sir Kenneth Keith have prepared for your committee.
So it's, um, summary points number two,
four and seven.
Um, and I'd like to add a second recommendation,
um, which, um, has come to mind following, um,
a hearing with the Governance
and Administration Committee,
including Andy Foster yesterday.
Um, that hearing was about the Auckland Harbor Board
and Tuna Borough Council Empowering Act Amendment bill.
And if you look at, um,
to Jeffrey Palmer's 12 point summary
and 0.2, it ends with limit the amount
of legislation the house is required
by the executive to assess.
And I think this bill that was, that I've just described,
um, was heard yesterday.
Um, it's an example of a local bill,
um, that I don't have all of the information,
but it appears to me that that bill was not necessary.
Uh, well, it should have perhaps the under the underlying
principle act should maybe be repealed rather than amended.
Um, so I'd like to recommend
that there is an additional sub clause.
And, um, so
and so in clause 1 0 3, um, one,
I think there should be a, an additional clause which
highlights the clerk's functions, duties
and powers in relation to local authorities.
I think there needs to be a signpost for local authorities
that may be wanting to promote an amendment to a local bill.
Um, and then hopefully
that signpost would enable the relevant facts
and legal issues to be considered in more detail
before the council goes on to develop
the documents for public consultation.
Okay. Thank you for your submission.
Are there any questions?
Um, I actually did have a question chair.
Um, so when you said that takes account
of changes in the technology, were you specifically thinking
of the use of artificial intelligence?
Um, not specifically.
Even just basic things like more effective use
of websites. Okay.
Thank You. Um, and emails.
So one of the points I singled out in the summary was number
seven about requiring schools to teach programs of civics.
So I think if the website content was better
and more aligned with
what the parliamentary council office is publishing,
it would be any, it would help everybody. Thank
You. And
We have one further question from Andy Foster.
Yeah, Anna, nice to see you again after yesterday.
Um, look, just, um, you said you're picking up on, uh,
Jeffrey Parliament's suggestion
to reduce the number of bills.
I mean, his, one of his key points he made was he thinks
that parliament's too busy, therefore we need more mps.
And actually, I'll put that term specifically saying, well,
do you think some of the processes of Parliament,
and that would include, uh, the number of bills and,
and whether there are too many of them, which are,
if you like, small in nature or could be joined together.
Uh, and also the processes within
Parliament could be more efficient.
Uh, and he still said, no, no, no.
I still think, still think you need more mps,
but you seem to be saying actually
there is room for efficiency.
And I am one of the few lawyers
that has completed governance New Zealand's
professional education program.
So I'm speaking from experience of having worked in a range
of, um, international, local, um, companies
and registered charities.
And if you get the right people
in the engine room, it helps everybody.
Okay, good. And actually, if I could just briefly add
to that point, it wasn't clear to me, um,
whether the PSA submission included or,
or covered people who are in-house lawyers.
So I asked them and they didn't come back to me.
But I think that that would be another good point
for your committee to investigate is that, um,
the professional, the professionals
that are working in the office of the clerk, um,
it's not clear to me the balance
of administrative versus professional.
And there needs to be clear distinctions in different
support for those individuals.
Thank you. Thank
You for your submission and very concise statements.
Thank you. Okay.
Thank, um, we now have Philippa, is it YA
or Philippa Ya?
Um, I have the pleasure
of making the submission day in my personal capacity, which,
uh, is novel and fun.
Um, so I highlighted one single issue,
which is what I regard as an omission from the bill.
And I think the bill should be extending the coverage
of the OIA to parliament's activities in the way
that the Law Commission and various others have recommended.
Um, and I am going to assume
that you are all hardworking conscientious committee members
and have read my submission,
so I won't go over the detail of that.
Um, but what I would note is that this is something
that has come through in a number
of submissions from a very diverse range of organizations.
You, we are hearing earlier from a taxpayers union on it,
uh, Jeffrey Perman, Kenneth Keith have raised it,
Graham LER Health Coalition Out
or Civil Liberties Council, and probably many others.
I didn't actually read every single submission myself
and probably not as diligent as you.
Um, and I mean, it's very difficult to find anyone outside
of Parliament who would in any way speak against extending
the OIA to cover Parliament.
Um, and it is a really important thing.
I I think a lot of the focus from some
of the other submitters has been on members' expenses.
Um, there's a lot of other things
that parliamentary money funds, it funds a lot
of political party activities
and it's actually part of the electoral funding system in a
way, um, because it is an important component of
what political parties spend and it's public money.
And the public should have the same level of transparency
and visibility over how that's money is spent
as if it were spent by, um, part of the executive.
Um, so yeah, that's the, the brief summary
and open to questions.
No. Alright, thank you. Any questions?
Yeah, I think it'd be useful if you would wanna go into
detail around and know, you know, what the OAE should cover,
but you've also in your in submission detail
what you think it should out.
Yeah. Because we're getting I guess, a range
of opinions on what it should and shouldn't.
Would you mind just expanding from your perspective? Yeah.
Um, why the list of things
that you think it shouldn't apply to?
Um, um, so I think it shouldn't cover the kind
of core parliamentary activity.
So what actually happens in house,
what happens in select committee, that kind of policy
development that, that, you know,
and the passing laws, which is a very core of
what, um, parliament does.
It shouldn't cover the constituency work, which is often,
um, quite confidential
and you know, specific to individuals.
Um, but there's also just a whole lot of, you know,
in many ways Parliament is an organization
and the kind of the sort of pay and rations as it were.
Um, not necessarily individuals pay,
but you know, that that kind of
how it functions an organization,
what it actually spends the money on, I think it needs the,
the transparency on spending the money,
and I think it's quite important
to have a bit more openness, um, particularly when
that money is not, uh, you know,
over time there's been a lot of creep in
what parliamentary funding goes to.
It's not just paying mps
and kind of their core constituency office staff.
You know, there's a quite a lot
of political party activity that's covered there.
Um, and I think there needs to be more,
more transparency about how that money's spent.
Can I, yeah, yeah.
Um, like I get all the money stuff right
and there's a lot of focus on it,
but, um, I think some of the other
important public issues that you might want to ask about
how decisions are made, you know, we had the occupation
and the speaker made a lot of decisions around that.
Um, what advice he received?
Um, select committees make decisions to receive
or not receive submissions.
How many? So you've gotta, there's, it's, it's easy
to say there's a clear line.
Yeah. But there's a lot of cases that you kind
of can generate that you think,
I can see both sides of that argument.
And I'd be interested in your thoughts on, on, on,
on the fact that there is a gray more than line
that gray zone, a gray zone, um,
and what the principles are in terms of if we were to take,
go down this road, what principle would we apply?
But, you know, it's just easy to say, hard to do. Yeah.
I know what you say. Um,
and I, I do think the law commission went yeah.
Reasonably far down the line on kind of dividing the line of
what you would and wouldn't include.
Um, I don't, I haven't kind of studied it beyond,
you know, their report.
I haven't gone into it in much greater
depth than what they have.
Um, but it's not a, you know, it is a gray area.
But what I would emphasize is that
many other parliamentary democracies have drawn those lines
and have, um, much greater transparency in terms
of their efficient information Act coverage than
what we do here.
So it's not impossible.
And we could kind of sit here
and debate exactly where it goes all day.
Think you just see, think it's no problem, not mine. Yeah.
Or at least, um, you know, I think it,
it would be great if this committee makes a, a first stab at
that and it, you know, at least even if you go for like,
the kind of minimum coverage,
that would be better than the nothing
that we have right now.
Yeah. That's good. Any other questions?
Doesn't seem to be, thank you very much.
Okay. Thanks very Much. Thank you.
Uh, we now have, uh, trust democracy,
Simon. Yeah. Yeah. Um,
Yours Simon White.
Simon. Hi, Annie and Annie. I used to work
At City Council. I'll met you for
15 minutes.
Um, then welcome to the committee.
Okay. Uh, Jora, um, um, my, I'm Simon Wright.
I'm chair of Trust Democracy.
Um, you'll see that our submission, uh,
very much focuses on democratic aspects, uh,
and around our concerns, uh, around the state of democracy.
Um, so, you know, we've got a just a couple
of very brief, uh, paragraphs about our concerns,
and that's very high level.
So I'd just like to start
by making those a little bit more concrete, uh, with a quiz.
So these are based on, uh, on, um, on a, uh,
2024 Ipsos survey
and a 2022 OECD survey.
So, um, what
proportion of people think the, uh,
economy is rigged in favor of the rich and powerful?
This, what proportion
of New Zealanders think the economy is rigged in
favor of the rich and powerful?
Are you asking us? Yeah.
Yeah. Take a stab. Well go around.
But I read that survey was locked. Yeah.
We are hearing your submission.
Yeah, no, I'm, um,
and your information to inform us on this bill. Right. Um,
So I'm trying, If you wanna quiz us on our knowledge,
you have to do that in your own time.
Okay. But it's your time.
You know, if, if you want
to use your 15 minutes me explaining things, that's
Fine. Okay. So, uh,
the Honorable, uh, Dr. Webb said it's a lot.
So it's, uh, it's about two thirds. Okay.
So this is one reason this, I'm trying
to give you some reasons why we should be concerned.
Um, uh, what proportion of, well,
I won't ask the question anymore.
Um, so
I should put my glasses on, shouldn't I?
Why don't you just give us the answer to your questions
And then we'll know. I don't,
yeah. So, um,
60% of New Zealanders believe the main divide in this
country is between ordinary people
and the political and economic elite.
Uh, and, um, of New Zealanders
who struggled to pay their bills,
only 40% trust parliament.
So I think we've been very
complacent about the state of democracy, um,
in New Zealand for a long time.
We haven't had any serious democratic innovation since MMP,
so 30 years ago, society's changed a lot since then.
And you can sort of see that in fact,
that we don't have many people just asking
questions about silly assumptions
and about how the system works.
So, to give you an example of that, um, we assume that, uh,
people elect electoral mps,
electorate mps get the legitimate legitimation
of their people to represent them
through getting more votes than the other candidates, right?
Um, you don't ask the silly question, well, does
that still hold if the number
of winning number of votes the winner gets is fewer
than the number of people, uh, who are eligible
to vote but didn't vote?
So if you get that, so as it turns out, there are 57,
uh, constituent mps in the current parliament
who actually got fewer votes than the number of people
who didn't vote in their constituencies 57.
So, I'm, I've experienced standard that's not just people
who were enrolled, but people who didn't get enrolled.
But that shows you, uh, assumptions about legitimacy.
Um, uh, you know, you can raise, you can raise a question
that calls those into question.
And I think we've become complacent
because we haven't been asking those sorts of questions.
Um, and I don't think we can, uh, uh, afford
to rest on our laurels because all
around the world democracies are struggling.
And even the ones that, uh, are highest rates, uh, on,
on those international indices are struggling.
Uh, New Zealand actually does pretty well on those indices.
We do well in representation, we do well in, um, uh, rights,
and we do well in the rule of law,
but actually we're only mid table, mid,
mid ranked when it comes to, uh, participation
of ordinary people in our policy making processes.
Um, so, um,
last year I went to, I, I've, I've recently been
to two global, um, uh, forums on democracy.
So I went to the Open Government Partnership Global Summit
last year, and I went to the OCD, uh, global Workshop on,
uh, trust and reinforcing democracy just a month ago.
And the good news from those was that, uh, members of those,
those organizations had lots of representatives there.
And I was impressed with the energy and, and,
and, uh, concern
that those people showed they wanna improve
things, they're doing stuff.
Uh, I was the only New Zealander there,
there were no New Zealand officials there at all.
Um, we're a member of both those organizations.
So I, I think we've been resting on our
laurels for too long.
Um, I think it's time for some democratic innovation,
and I think Parliament needs to get, um, uh, protecting
and strengthening democracy up its agenda a bit and to,
and to make the most opportunities to innovate and,
and strengthen and, and enhance democracy.
So I think this bill is, is,
is a missed opportunity in that respect.
Um, this bill, this bill is about the rules
of parliament, the rules of the game.
And yet you've got significant numbers of members of
proportions of the public who don't trust politicians,
who don't trust politicians to put the interests
of the public ahead of, uh, party and, um, vested interests.
So this is actually an opportunity,
I think this is the perfect opportunity to start to try some
of these innovative processes that are widely used overseas,
like citizens assemblies.
And I think that should have been used as, as something like
that should have been used in the process
of developing the bill.
Um, it's been shown in places like Ireland that those sorts
of processes can make a major difference for public trust
and, and policy proposals, uh, even on the most, uh,
controversial and, and sensitive issues like abortion,
and also can improve trust in, um, parliaments and, and,
and, and, uh, and politicians.
So, um, we see it as a missed opportunity. Um,
so, um, cratic innovation isn't just about new participatory
processes for invigorating democracy.
It's also about the simple basic stuff,
um, and improving things.
So, um, uh, we support, um, parliament taking control of
the budgets for parliamentary agencies.
It should, should never have been the executive controlling
that because Parliament's supposed
to be holding the executive to account.
So we support that, but we are not satisfied just
with adopting the, the Offices of Parliament funding model,
you know, just picking it up and, and, and repurposing it
because it, it actually lacks, uh, transparency
and, and participation.
The current model, most people don't know about it.
Um, it's, it's opaque.
And so I think, uh, some work is needed to make that to,
yeah, to make it more transparent
and provide for participation.
And this, this gets to the trust and confidence issue.
Um, we've previously submitted, um, to the sanding orders,
uh, review that we think select committees, uh, need
and deserve, uh, independent expert, um, uh, advisors,
uh, when considering bills.
And, uh, we think this bill is a, an opportunity to make
that explicit in the functions of, of, um,
in the function section as a clause 103, I think it is.
Um, and, uh,
I just like to pick up on Phillip's
submission about the OIA.
Um, we think, uh, the scope should be extended
to, um, parliament.
Um, so the Office of the clerk, uh, office of the speaker,
and the Parliamentary Commission.
Um, and our reason for that is, is Democratic, uh,
access to information is fundamental to being able
to participate in, in the business of Parliament
for the public to be able to participate in the,
in the business of Parliament.
Uh, it's a right, uh,
in most countries it's recognized as a right.
So it recognizes the right here
and it's done in most, um, parliamentary democracies
that we would, uh, compare ourselves to.
So I'll end my submission. And, um,
So we've got about four minutes left.
Okay. Yeah, I'll, I'll end my submission there.
Uh, any questions? Uh,
Any questions for Simon?
Well, I, I am interested in the, um,
the self-interested reasons.
I mean, there's, there's a link, right?
Between funding and what can be done within parliament.
You raise, um, the use of government department
to select committee support and your submission.
Um, and given, um, you know, the volume of submissions
that comes through and so on, uh, at the moment, uh,
you know, select committees don't
have that kind of resource.
And I, I'm just interested in your kind of, yeah.
Just why you are making that submission.
'cause I think it's one of the interesting ones you make
around the independent advice
and the current advice in your view,
not being particularly independent. Well,
There, there's, there's these conflicts of interest.
So, um, uh, I know, um,
departmental advisors, no question about their skill or,
or anything like that, but they have a conflict of interest
that's serving a minister often.
And so it's, um, I think in the interests of many people
who I know who have submitted
to select committees don't feel that, um,
their submissions get correctly, um, summarized
and in the summary of submissions and so on.
And they sometimes feel that, you know, there might be this
conflict because the current advice are not,
I mean, this is the ongoing problem of the dominance,
or just the fact clearly you will,
of the dominance of the executive, right?
The parliament is basically withdrawal of executive,
because the executive always comprises the majority parties,
Which is One of those things.
It's one of those things. But then that if you push
that too hard, then, uh,
then you Quest call question the very role of parliament,
which is to hold the executive into account.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, I get that.
So, so you, you've gotta have some strong institutions in
place to make certain that Parliament does actually fulfill
that role of, of holding the executive to account.
Okay. Thank you. Yeah.
Question, if I could, could add, I mean,
I think there's plenty of scope for,
for democratic innovation in terms of holding of what,
sorry, of de for Democratic innovation such
as citizens assemblies, um, such as, um, uh,
pa um, participatory budgeting, um, for, uh,
improving the confidence that the public has that that,
that the executive is being held to account.
I'm also a believer that, um,
although I see that Bill strikes out the old legislation
around the parliament is, what was it called?
The upper house, the Parliamentary Council,
is it called Council?
Yeah. We're striking that, and fair enough, it's well gone.
But I do think in the New Zealand case, there is a,
there is a, we have the opportunity to actually experiment
with new forms of upper houses.
So, um, uh, so, um,
someone like Rory Stewart,
the well-known British politician,
conservative party politician with the famous podcast, um,
believes that, um, uh, to improve trust in parliaments, uh,
we should be instituting upper houses
with randomly selected groups of citizens consider, uh,
uh, bills.
Uh, and if they don't think they're in the public interest,
they would not have the power to veto them.
They'd have the power to send 'em back
to the lower house for the reconsideration.
And if the lower house doesn't want to, uh,
reconsider the bill, uh, then the rule would be that the,
the vote to put it
through would have to be by secret ballot.
Uh, so the, so the, around the world, there are all sorts
of proposals for ways in which you can make parliament, uh,
uh, more accountable to the people where you put, um,
elected representatives, uh,
some people call it in competition with, um, citizen
or deliberative bodies, uh, to make certain that, um, uh,
it protects parliament against the capture by,
or the perceived capture by vested interests,
having these citizen bodies, uh, operating alongside.
And another example of that is in Belgium,
I've actually set up a, a,
I couldn't use Belgium as a great democracy.
Yeah. But, but the thing is that they're innovating
and that they're trying new things.
So, for example, they've set up a, a, a third branch
of government for their German speaking minority, uh,
which is advisory to the main parliament.
Uh, and again, it's been running for 10 years now.
Uh, users randomly sectored members
of the German speaking community, uh,
to consider issues from the German speaking minorities'
point of view, make recommendations as the main parliament.
And it seems to have, uh, really improved, um, uh,
the trust that the German speaking minority are having,
that they're getting properly represented
and their issues are being properly considered.
So there's all sorts of things that we could be doing.
And, and I hope this bill, um, uh, um,
enables that sort of experimentation going into the future.
'cause we're gonna need it, I think, to address the sorts
of issues we're facing in the future.
Unfortunately, Simon, your time's up.
But thank you very much for your submission.
Thank you. Thank you. Thanks Simon.
Thank you. Um, members, Benjamin Easton isn't able
to be with us, so we will go to Brent n
To accept the analyst.
Brent, if you can hear me, can you please
accept the promotion?
Hello, I'm Hyde Brent.
Uh, welcome to the Parliament Bill, uh, select committee.
Um, members have readed your submission,
and you have five minutes to speak to us. Thank,
Thank you very much. Good
afternoon. Um, first off, I'd just like to thank Kate,
Diane, and Jody for helping me with this.
Um, I'm opposed to part two
of the parliamentary privilege, section nine.
Um, the exemption of members, including the Speaker
of the House from obligation to attend the courts
and tribunals, the Bill of Rights 1688.
Parliamentary privilege is not only afforded
to the ministers, but a privilege of the people
of New Zealand, United Kingdom, Australia, Ireland,
and Europe, subsection six.
That is the exemption of members from an obligation
to attend a court
or tribunal that is Republic repugnant
to the subject liberties to be allowed.
It is our indubitable right
to participate in the courts freely
and to summon any ministers when our ancient rights
and liberties might be in danger of being subverted
to seek remedy the Bill
of Rights 1688 frequent parliaments.
The subjects do claim and demand
and insist upon all their undoubted rights and liberties.
The subjects are particularly encouraged
to pursue declarations from his highness, the Prince
of Orange, as the only means of obtaining full redress
and a remedy therein.
To my understanding, that means that the people
of New Zealand always have the right to summon ministers
to the court when vindicating
and asserting their ancient rights and liberties.
Now the second part, as a descendant of both Native
Pakeha and Native and Maori ancestors,
I am unique in that my ancestor Louis er,
married a native princess on Stewart Island in the
early 18 hundreds.
He bought land from a native chief pre 1840,
which was seated to the crown in the provisional bill 1838
and later confiscated.
There is no way for me to remedy this
because I have been denied access to the Waitangi Tribunal
to investigate my property rights as a akha, my standard,
so solidarity with my elders sister, Catherine ti,
whose ancestors own territories in Nelson,
and were survivors of the Yra massacre in 1843.
Because of this historical injustice, I am opposed
to part six of the Bill Subpart two,
the Parliamentary corporation, section 1 4 4 A
and B, that the body corporate may exercise all rights,
powers and privileges over my individual person.
Furthermore, I'm opposed to section 1, 4 6 specific powers
of parliamentary corporation, subsection two, to sell,
transfer, and assign lands
that may include my ancient lands, which is a forfeiture
of person without consent.
And the Bill of Rights 1688, will
and Mary, as the Honorable Winston Peters announced in
Parliament Middle New Zealand has had enough.
This proposed bill is a travesty that is contrary
to our constitutional right.
Thank you.
Uh, thank you very much for your submission.
Are there any questions? Not from me.
No, we don't have any questions for you,
but, uh, we appreciate your submission.
Thank you very much. Thanks
Very much for hearing me.
Uh, we now have Wendy
Online, so do Christopher.
Oh, we've got Chris on. Let's go.
Chris, let's, let's go to Chris then.
Oh, there, it's,
thank you, madam. Apologize.
Well, good afternoon, Mr. Chair.
Good afternoon. Uh, welcome
to the Parliament Bill Select Committee.
Well, um, uh, professor Dean Knight said it was, um,
a Feast for Nerds.
So I have to confess, I am a nerd
beside myself with joy that we've reached stage, and it's
because of your contribution, Mr.
Chair, when you were speaker and also, uh, RIF mallard
before that, having put up with my letters,
Um, From my point of view, I think I can, uh,
make a minute long submission.
Um, it's an excellent piece of legislation,
and the clerk is to be congratulated
for the very thorough job that was done.
And the, it, it's a single issue submission.
Um, my interest in a parliamentary budget office was aroused
by Professor Jonathan Boston in 2018.
Shortly after I went back into opposition.
Uh, he was visiting members of Parliament
and socializing the idea.
Sadly, it didn't go anywhere,
but it does seem to be an idea whose time has come.
I know Barbara Monds has submitted a bill on the subject,
and, and I submit to you that this Parliament Bill, uh,
provides the perfect opportunity.
Of course, it's out of scope,
but that's something the business committee could
fix up in about a minute.
Uh, and, uh, a parliamentary budget office fits within the
Parliament Bill, as it does in other Commonwealth
parliamentary pieces of legislation.
Uh, and, um, I submit that the Australian precedent, uh,
set out in the Parliamentary Service Act 1999,
uh, provides a, uh, very good precedent about
how a parliamentary budget office
could operate in New Zealand.
So, I know that you are overwhelmed
with interesting submissions, uh,
and so I won't waste the, uh, committee's time any longer.
Uh, but submit one, it's an idea whose time has come.
Two, it will greatly improve the operation
of Parliament three, uh, rather than Barbara having
to pursue a member's bill, why not, uh,
follow the Nike slogan and just do it.
Thank you. That would be good. Have any question, Ricardo?
Yeah. Thank you for your submission.
Um, I wanted to just check, um, 0.7 of your submission.
When you talk about, um,
what you see the parliamentary budget offers being able
to do is, uh, I know that you talk about the fiscal impact
of the election commitments of major parties.
How would you define major parties? Um, here?
Just post Parliament or, uh, yeah.
Oh, good question, because, uh, of course,
I was picking up what was done in Australia,
and of course, you know, you're on the one side,
you've got the Liberal Nationals,
and on the other side you've got the, uh, the Labor Party.
Uh, I would've thought in New Zealand, reflecting the MMP
environment, uh, that, uh, why should, uh,
any party be exempt from, uh, this kind of analysis?
And so I would definitely include your party, sir.
Party, you say. Yeah.
Any other question?
Uh, can I just ask, uh, good to see you, um, Chris,
how big is this entity?
Because you say a person,
but in fact, it's gonna be a,
it's gonna be a big office, right?
Yeah, yeah. I don't, I mean, we, the last thing we want
to do is replicate a treasury within Parliament.
Uh, so I would've thought, uh, a parliamentary budget, uh,
a budget officer supported by four
or five people would be a very good start.
But I agree with you. The last thing we want is sort
of rampant bureaucracy within the Parliament.
Mm-Hmm. Thanks for that,
Andy. Yeah.
I'm gonna change tack a little bit.
Uh, Kristen area, which you haven't touched on,
just we've had a number of people talking about the, um,
application of the OIA to, uh, to Parliament.
And if you had any observations around that,
and if so, where you think it should apply
and where you should think it should not apply?
Well, I have read, um, the very good paper published
by the Helen Clark Foundation, which talks about how, um,
making, uh, the OIA applicable
to Parliament is a very good idea.
I must say, personally, I endorse that, uh,
whether it's done through a review
of the Official Information Act
or through this legislation, I would've thought, uh,
it would be best done
through the Official Information Act. Mr. Foster.
Okay. Thank you.
I'm kilda.
Um, Mr. Finn, Maria Maori.
I wanted to, um, uh, Jeffrey Palmer talked, um,
in his presentation around, uh, just the amount of work,
volume of work coming through the system,
and we just simply don't have the capacity.
There's just not enough mps and too much work.
Can you just, what, what do you think to that kind
of discussion from them?
Well, I think, um, for example, uh, when it, a lot
of people don't realize their primary task is
to be a legislator. Uh, and, um,
I think That was never an issue for me
because I used to stand and r and tie
and get my head head kicked in by an every election.
So I never really had an opportunity to be an elector mp.
Thank God
The people are very pleased,
As Only exceeded by mine.
Um, but I have to say, I don't believe that increasing, uh,
the numbers of members of Parliament is
necessarily the issue.
But, um, members of Parliament recognizing their obligations
as legislators, uh, and instead of passing
or not scrutinizing legislation so
that you have formulaic references to the, to the treaty,
for example, descending into some detail as
what actually one is hoping to achieve
and treaty principles in relation
to a particular piece of legislation.
And I compare, for example, section four
of the Conservation Act 1986, with the work
that I did in relation to historic places.
So it's a question of, um, uh, effort
and, um, knuckling down, frankly.
But I don't think increasing the house
to 200 people would be the answer.
Oh, thank you very much. Any final questions?
No, no. Thank you very much. Thank
To see you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you very much. Thanks for all you've done.
Yeah. Um,
we now have the, we, are we going back to Wendy?
Sorry she hasn't turned up, but we do have, okay.
We'll go to the Pacific Youth Leadership
and Transformation Trust.
Oh, Kira, welcome to the Parliament Bill,
um, select committee.
Um, how much time? Oh, we've got, uh, you for 15 minutes.
So welcome, um, to the committee
and we've read your submission, so please speak to us.
Cool. Uh,
uh, my pronouns are he, him, I'm on someone else's laptop
who just made it, she her on, um, on Zoom.
Thank you very much for the opportunity to speak.
Uh, I'm speaking on behalf of Pacific Youth Leadership
and Transformation Trust.
Uh, and I'll speak about the background
because it links directly
to why we have submitted the way we have submitted.
Uh, we support this bill, uh,
because our mission in life is
to empower Pacific Young people to participate in democracy.
And there's a huge number of different ways we do that.
But one of the ways we do that is an event
that we call ICE Speak, where we take the topic
of the day, whatever that might be.
We've had many in our times,
including deep Sea oil drilling, the War
and Isol, the End of Life Choice goal,
and just recently the Western Samo Act.
And when we hold these events, they're super fun.
The foods go in, the music's pumping.
Young people come in
and they get to hear information about issues
that are being present in Parliament of the day.
Now, as a charitable trust, it's really important that we,
we give a non-partisan view
of these issues that come through.
And in order to do that, we have lent on the help
of the parliamentary services in the past,
and they've been able to do that
because of the education part that they have.
We also then get, uh, views from mps who are for
and against whatever that issue might be.
And then young people give their their point of view.
We take that, we turn it into a submission,
and then we, um, take it
to select committee just like we're doing now.
And that's one way in which we get the public
participating, uh, in our democracy.
Uh, so I guess we want to lend weight
and say we absolutely agree that sections 1 0 3 G
and 1 24 F stay part of the bill, uh, which is
to educate the public about Parliament
and support the public to engage with Parliament.
What we would like to possibly suggest is
that could these be, uh, expanded to give effect
to New Zealand signing of international conventions,
including the rights of the child persons with disabilities,
and the newly signed declaration, um, of future generations.
Now, there are existing pieces of law, um,
which could be used as a template if you like.
Uh, the Education Act 1989, section 1 8 1 C.
In there it says that the duty of a council
of an institution has
to encourage the greatest possible participation
by the community served by their institution so as
to maximize the educational potential of all members
of those communities.
And this is the important part
with particular emphasis on those groups
and those communities that are underrepresented
amongst those populations.
So we feel if you took that last bit
and added it to the current section, you've got,
it would help give weight
and a little bit of effect to some
of those international declarations
and conventions that New Zealand does already adhere to.
So we think that could be a cool thing.
Uh, the other bit that I wanna talk to,
and I heard some other speakers talk about it today,
is the trust that the public have in parliament.
Now, obviously, we all know the trust in Parliament is
negatively impacted by the game of politics
and the actions of politicians.
That's just how some things work.
Uh, we of course want to see
that our parliament is free from this negative, uh, tone.
And we think the only way to do that is to engage more
and education,
educate our public more about the non-partisan nature
that our parliamentary services can, um, can be.
And we think that, uh, one way you could do this is
allowing us a lit a little bit more of a say on things
outside of the three year review of the standing orders.
We do submit on that one as well,
but we think if there was more chances to submit
and to be involved in that decision making,
it could grow people's trust in Parliament.
Uh, another part of the bill that we want to add weight to
and say we agree is the Make
Parliament more family friendly.
Now. Absolutely. We agree with this
and we specifically wanna talk about some
of the mental health issues that we have seen arise
for our nps, uh, in Parliament both this year
and in previous years for multiple parties.
We all say we need to support our nps
and we care about mental health,
yet at the same time they need to be subject to scrutiny.
Uh, and so that's the nature of the job,
but where we can care for people's wellbeing
and support them in a more friendly way, we should.
And one way is to allow that wellbeing time
with their family and accommodate for
that in fierce circumstances.
So we would like to say we absolutely
support that part of the bill.
The next part of the bill that we like is the consolidation
of all these pieces of legislation into a single bill
I previously talked about.
I speak the event that we hold
to talk about different issues.
The first I speak we ever held was on the Constitution
conversation back in 2012, I think it was.
And we actually thought it was okay
to have a single codified constitution, not
because we think by law that's the best way,
but we think it's just easier for the public to understand.
So based on those principles, we we agree a single bill, um,
as is being proposed, here is the right way to go.
It's easier for us to understand the public
when it's all in one place.
Uh, another point that we would just like to raise is
that we agree with, um, parliament having a budget
of the things that it funds as opposed to government.
And all we would say here is, are there other parts where,
um, that should be funded
by Parliament instead of government?
Are there other, other organizations that we refer to
as independent, but actually the controlled
by the government of the day?
Perhaps this isn't the piece of legislation to put it in,
but I think it's worth noting
and perhaps a little bit of research at least to have a look
as, are there other entities that should be funded
by Parliament instead of government?
Uh, the last part I'd like to say
that isn't in our submission,
but I wanna say it anyway, is that I reckon
that Youth Parliament should be legislated in this, uh,
bill, I think Youth Parliament is an awesome thing
that parliamentary services put on every year.
And what an amazing message that would be to send
to our young people of valor,
which is we do care about your voice,
we want you participating in Parliament,
and we've now put it in legislation as part of our democracy
that we are gonna hold Youth Parliament every three years.
So thank you very much for, uh,
taking your time to listen to us.
We support this bill Spell.
Thank you very much. Members. Are there any questions?
Good work? That was very good. That was amazing.
That was a lot of information in a short amount of time.
I wish everyone was So was that interesting? Yeah, yeah.
And relevant. We were, we have definitely noted your,
your oral submission and your written one as well.
So thank you very much.
If, if there's nothing else, we'll just say you very much.
Thank you. Bye.
Got, uh,
we now have oh, press gallery.
Oh, me,
afternoon. Hi.
Bit unusual to be on the other side
of it. Here we are. We've
Been looking forward to this.
I can see it in your eyes. You're about to get back at me
for the years of grilling.
I'm, I'm worried now. Um,
We've got you for 15 minutes.
So 15 minutes. Um, very well aware of how we operate, so,
Terrific. Hey, well
thank you so much
for allowing the Press Gallery to submit on this bill.
Um, as I say, it's not something that we do often,
but we think that, um, this is something
that we feel quite strongly about.
I've talked to the various different editors of the,
the gallery, um, and we've come up with a submission.
Um, I'm here with Mark Del,
who's joining us from somewhere in Europe
'cause he's at cop, um, and having a great time there.
And I'd also like to acknowledge, um, Anna White
and, um, Laura Walters from the Press Gallery
executive as well.
So I'll do a brief overview of our submission
and then you can fire away at questions.
Um, does that sound all right? Yep. Terrific. Okay.
So, um, we're only submitting on a narrow issue on this
bill, but we feel quite strongly about it.
That narrow issue is expanding the scope of the OIA
to include parliamentary agencies.
We would note that we are not advocating to extend the OIA
to the House of Representatives
or members of Parliament themselves.
You'll be happy to learn. We believe
that there is a blind spot currently in the legislation when
it comes to parliamentary agencies,
specifically parliamentary services.
And in our submission, we lean heavily on advice from the
Law Commission's review.
Um, in, in the 1980 Dank Report Committee, according
to the Law Commission, the um, 1980 report, um, of
that committee states the creation of the OIA expected
that its proposal would in due course affect practice in
relation to information
and generally held by Parliament 32 years later in 2012.
In its then report of the OIA, the Law Commission again said
that there is legitimate
and significant, significant public interest
that weighs in favor of a principle of availability
of information held by Parliament
and its administrations just as much
as the case of the executive.
Um, as it stands, members of the public can OIA, the likes
of, uh, the New Zealand Kiwi Fruit Board.
They can OIA, the Winston Churchill Memorial Trust Board.
You can OIAA school board.
Um, but at this stage you cannot OIA parliamentary services.
And we think that that is a blind spot in the legislation.
So we're calling it an anomaly.
Um, and the inner workings of Parliament, we believe are
of high, um, public interest.
And then due to this legislative blind stop,
the taxpayers are essentially being locked out of, um,
seeing how their money is being spent in
many, um, perspectives.
So I'll just pa pass the mark very quickly to, um, run
through a couple of examples
that we've come up with over the years.
Hello, uh, thank you so much for, um, for,
uh, hearing our submission.
Uh, we have a couple case studies that we think are helpful
for the committee to think about when, when considering
what it might look like for, uh, for freedom
of information laws to be extended
to parliamentary agencies.
Darlene Tanana and her sort of legal, um, uh, cases is,
is one that's come up quite recently.
Uh, it's not clear whether any of that has been funded
through her parliamentary budget, IE by the taxpayer,
you know, the Green Party WA was able
to tell reporters here's how much of our investigation, uh,
was funded out of our parliamentary budget versus our,
our private party budget.
But Darlene Tona has refused to answer those questions,
and we have no recourse as journalists
or as members of the public, uh, to, to find, uh,
out further information.
Parliamentary service has no obligation to provide
that information to us.
Um, culture issues.
We, we have had for many years discussions
of culture issues at Parliament.
There are existing withholding grounds under the Official
Information Act that prevent personal
information from being released.
And those would still apply in this sort of situation.
But when there are similar issues
as have been faced in parliament, in ministries
and departments of the government,
some information has been able
to be released under the Official Information Act.
And that hasn't been the case
with the parliamentary service.
It's just been up to the speaker
and the Chief Executive of the parliamentary service about
what they do or don't want to release.
The, the third thing I'd say is, is just, um,
often we think about OIA requests and,
and transparency in the context of scandals.
It doesn't have to be a negative.
Not everything that the government does in terms
of taxpayer spending is bad.
And by not, uh, by not having that information available
to the public, it leaves a vacuum where bad actors
and bad faith can speculate about how much money is going
to this or that, and saying, parliament won't tell us,
and they're not legally obligated to.
So for our perspective, transparency, uh,
helps shine a light on, on the good things
that Parliament does, as well as the things that, you know,
may need to be held accountable for.
And then finally, I just note, you know,
we've picked up very strongly from the Law Commission's
recommendations in its 2012 report.
And, and that is very specific about what kinds
of information would fall, uh, under the OIA in, in terms
of the information held by the parliamentary
service and the office of the clerk.
It's not quite the same as wholesale, expanding the OIA, uh,
to those agencies as they apply, as it applies
to other ministries and departments.
Um, and we think it's important to, to consider the nuances
that have been presented in that report.
Perhaps the commission the committee might land in a
different place from the commission,
but that there is some, some room to find a way
to expand the, uh, the jurisdiction
or scope of freedom
of information laws in New Zealand without infringing on
the, the things that we think are very important
to remain private, like constituency information,
uh, and that sort of thing. Thank you.
Terrific. Thank you very much. And I'd like
to acknowledge all the work
that Mark has done on this report.
Um, he's the brains, um, just the, um, the,
I was gonna say the broad one, but I'm not even that.
But, um, I'd love to welcome any questions
that you have at this stage, and I'll answer them
to the fullest of my ability.
Go to Ricardo. Yeah, thank you for your submission.
Hey, look, well, I take it since you're advocating for, um,
broaden in this cup of the OAA
to these entities you described, can I take it, um,
that you also would advocate for adequate resourcing
to those same entities so that I guess
that information can be provided in a timely
and, um, transparent manner?
Yeah, I mean, the scope
of our submission doesn't really reach out to the, the, the,
the nuances of funding.
I mean, I think that one would come with the other,
that would be the expectation of us.
But we do note that within our submission we talk about
how the Parliament Bill is actually looking at expanding
the, the, the resources of Parliament in a number of ways.
And I would wouldn't want to lobby the government on how
to spend their money, but I would say if you've got a
pie, it's getting bigger.
I would say that this would come into the, into that.
But surely when you do OAS to government agencies, right,
like, you know, having, uh, even
before being an MP engage with journalists on this, I mean,
there, there are ongoing frustrations by journalists around
how long does O IAS get back
and the quality of the information that you get.
So, I mean, I I do you see, I guess, that second component
of the advocacy that you're doing around the resourcing
to ensure that I guess
what you're asking actually gets delivered adequate?
Well, one half of the funding, one half of the, um,
what we're asking of course,
would be expanding the OIA into parliamentary services.
And if that requires expanding the funding, of course,
that would be one element of it.
Um, again, I wouldn't be getting into the, the position
where I'm telling the government how to spend its money
or where it should be diverting resources,
but to get the best information possible,
you need people working on the information.
I think that you would be able to work
with the Public Service Commission to see
how they do it within other jurisdictions,
for example, other ministries.
So you can, um, streamline the process in a way
that it would be fiscally conservative enough,
but at the same time being able to provide the information
that would be required for the appropriate
level of transparency.
Object. I think, oh, mark, go ahead.
Jump in on that. You know, it, it, it's,
it's worth knowing that the Parliament Bill,
it gives Parliament the ability to,
to set its own budget to some extent.
So that's not fully an issue for us.
But that does heighten the need for, in our view, this,
this transparency and accountability measure.
Because now, uh, even the budget
of these agencies is not being set by Treasury
and the finance minister who are subject to the OIA,
this is the power that Parliament is taking onto itself.
And if Parliament decides that it needs, uh, extra, uh,
resourcing in order to respond to this expanded scope,
that's a decision that that Parliament, um, you know, is,
is now empowered to make
Dr. Wynn. Thank you.
Um, so you mentioned that you didn't want it to ex extend
to members, um, but then also use the example of Darlene.
Tana, am I missing something?
Was there some other, um, mechanism that you'd want to use
to examine, um, something like that?
Sure. The, the example about Darlene Tanana was less about
her personal life and more about the, the cost
to taxpayers of her legal expense.
For example, in our submission, we go into detail about how,
you know, the mps texting somebody would not be in the scope
of the OAA, it wouldn't usually be,
because that is under the scope of the current legis, um,
OAA legislation.
There is, um, prevention methods in place to mean that
that information isn't released to the public.
I would argue it's not worth,
it's not within the public interest, however,
Budget would be within. But
I, I would say that All expenses, some
of the other expenses submitters, I suggested
that we should have full, um, um, openness of all spending
of public money by all members of Parliament.
Yes, correct. To to, to a a certain extent.
We're not gonna sit there and get precious over if you're
spending $5 on a coffee.
I don't think that's within public interest.
But we le our submission leans on does not
include, I know Mr.
Miga is a, is a fan of the caffeinated beverages,
but we, um, our, our submission really relies on the fact
that it comes down to public interest.
The example with Darlene
and Tanana is that the, the pre the press gallery
reporters at large
or the general public, were not able to know
how much that cost them.
Um, because of the current legislation,
the blind spot in the legislation, we see it.
Thank you.
Any other questions?
Has, has the gallery submitted on other
bills recently or in the past?
'cause it seems like a big step to, for the gallery
to come in and make a submission on a bill.
I can't remember the last time it might have happened.
Yeah, it is relatively rare.
And I think that that was worth me noting that upfront just
to say that is, um, how seriously we take this.
I mean, we are here on behalf
of the people that we report for.
This is not a fishing expedition for journalists
who just wanna see what you're spending your money on
or what sort of
conversations that you're having with each other.
This is about members of the public, um,
getting vital information.
I mean, if you think about the examples that I gave, I mean,
no disrespect to the Winston Churchill memorial,
but it is not as much public interest it is
to the good people of Parliament
and how taxpayers' money is being spent.
A lot of people think democracy,
they think po they think Parliament.
And I think that that is why we've been
so forthright in our submission.
Um, can I, oh, sorry, mark you go. If you've got more,
The, the Press Gallery has submitted on some issues in the
past, I think a standing orders review a couple of years ago
around, uh, filming rules in Parliament.
So generally when something affects our work,
we do feel like we we're able to step in and,
and express our view, but it, it is not common.
We don't submit on, on most bills.
I think it would be fair to say
I'd like, if I can, um, just put to you the, the, um,
taxpayer's money's kind of an easy target.
Um, but in terms of public interest in the work that you do,
um, some of the other things that go on around here probably
are even of more public interest, such as decisions about
how aspects of this place are run,
how the protests are managed on the front lawn,
um, and things like that.
And a, a whole myriad of decisions
that are made about public interactions, uh,
with Parliament, you know, who pays for the use
of facilities and who doesn't, all those kinds of things.
Right. Mm-Hmm. And I guess my question is, it's quite hard
to make a distinction between, um, kind of
the Proceedings of Parliament, which are, you know, bill
of Rights 1688 wassan
and things which are entirely removed from the
proceedings of Parliament.
Do you, do you have views on that
and how we could, if, if we were
to frame up a rule like this,
how we would actually draw a line between those? Well,
You would, you would lean very heavily on the
original scope of, um, the OIA legislation that we have.
We're not looking to reinvent the wheel, we're just looking
to put another, spoke on it in the sense
that Parliament would just be in addition to
what is already in scope under the OIA
and Mark made a a good point
before in terms of contextualizing things.
I mean, you can see journalists
and, um, it's fair that you do a lot
of the time we'll look at things
and get very netty nitpicky on how much things are costing.
But as Mark made the point, sometimes it's very important
to contextualize information.
If there is a vacuum of information around something
of great public importance, then bad actors might start to
talk about, this is probably costing taxpayers
to pay us hundreds of millions of dollars.
Whereas if we have this legislation in place,
we can actually proactively tell our listeners, our readers
and our viewers, this is not actually the case.
Here is the amount of cost.
Go and make your own assumptions based on that.
So we see our job as very much presenting the
information as it is.
We, if you wanna talk politics is one view.
'cause that wasn't my question at all.
My question was about things other than cost, but no,
Yeah, I, I think, again, um, going back to the,
the Law Commission's report is really helpful for us here.
They specify three things that would fall under, uh,
the subject of the i a in, in relation
to the parliamentary service in the office of the clerk.
That statistical information about the parliamentary
agency's activities,
information about the agency's expenditure of public money
and information about the agency's assets, resources,
support systems, and other administrative matters.
So as opposed to, uh, other ministries,
these are the only things that would be in scope.
And the Law Commission took a step further
and said, there are four things they want explicitly
excluded from the oia, uh, uh, scope as well.
Things like, uh, information that's held by an agency solely
as an agent for the House of Representatives
or a member of Parliament.
Um, nothing in, in the act, uh, applies to proceedings
of the house or limits or affects any privileges, immunities
or powers of the house, or its committees
or members, et cetera.
And so will there be some gray area between the things
that are explicitly allowed
and the things that are explicitly disallowed?
Yeah. But we also have gray area in the OIA as is,
and the Ouds Ombudsman's office is, is well, uh, equipped
to deal with, um, with sorting out those issues and, and,
and establishing a well equipped, maybe not well resourced
to, to, to sort out those issues and,
and establish, you know, a, a, a precedent and,
and, um, a standard for going forward.
So I don't think this necessarily is going to be an,
an easy thing to sort out.
Um, fortunately it's not our job that's,
that's yours if you do choose to pick this up to figure out
how to, how to divvy up those lines.
But we think it's important to consider it's an opportunity,
uh, that doesn't come along very often.
Um, and, and just
'cause it's difficult, doesn't mean it shouldn't be tried.
Thanks mate. Thank you. Any other questions?
Terrific. Well, thank you very much for your time.
Thank you. Thank you for your submission.
Yeah, we'll revert to the other way around.
Uh, we now have Health Coalition, they on Zoom?
Yeah, we got Boyd
come.
Ah, can you, can you hear me and see me? There we are.
Um, Boyd, welcome to the Parliament Bill,
um, select committee.
Um, members have read your, uh,
submission from Health Coalition.
Uh, you have 15 minutes with us, you'd like
to make your submission.
Thank you, Koto.
Thank you very much indeed for this opportunity
to give an oral submission.
Um, so my name's Boy Swinburn.
I'm a public health physician
and professor at University of Auckland.
But, uh, the submission is on, is on behalf
of Health Coalition ero, which I'm the co-chair.
And, um, the health coalition RTRI is, uh,
is focused on trying to improve the policies and the, um,
and the, and the structures so that, uh,
that reduces the harm from, uh, harmful products such
as tobacco, alcohol,
and unhealthy food, uh, within, uh, within
for, for New Zealanders.
And also to try to ensure that our processes are
as transparent and as, um, trustworthy as possible
because, um, a lot of the value in what we are trying
to push, uh, trying to promote is around, um,
around policies.
And that is often interfered with by, uh, by lobbying.
So there's two areas of activities that we've, uh,
bumped up, uh, against that relate to this, uh, bill.
And the first is, uh, around citizens initiated referenda.
And, uh, we bumped into that
because we were looking for democratic ways
to respond to what happened with the Smoke-free legislation
when, um, it was repealed, uh, by this,
by this government without it being, um, uh, canvased on or,
or as part of the election campaign.
And we are looking into that as a, as a way to sort of, um,
bring the democracy to this issue.
Um, and we did head polls to show that it was,
it was a very unpopular piece of repeal.
So, but when we looked into the, uh, the 1993 Act
for Citizens initiated referendum, we found
how outdated it was.
And since that's a sort of pre-internet era, um,
everything was, um, kind of pen and paper related.
And, um, we worked with the clerk
of the house about whether, uh, electronic versions
of this could, could happen to improve efficiency
and security and trustworthiness and so on.
Um, and while he, while the Clark was, uh, sympathetic
to this, he, because it wasn't explicit in the legislation,
he felt that he couldn't, um, he couldn't, uh, allow that.
And so we are stuck with a kind of pre-internet piece
of democracy, um,
that I think needs to be brought up to date.
And since the part nine of this bill does cover aspects, um,
of the CIR act, uh,
mainly transferring responsibilities from the Clark
to the Electoral Commission, I think it's a good opportunity
to bring, uh, bring it up into the digital era.
And, um, there are a few things, um, needed
to be able to do that.
Um, the first of all, the, um, the, the,
the Contract and Commercial Law Act, um,
allows for electronic signatures to be used
as a true signature, um,
for many interact many, uh, transactions.
But for some reason,
and I dunno what the reason is that, um, that act
specifically excludes, uh, citizens initiated referendum
that still, um, pencil and paper stuff.
So, um, I guess if we're doing an omnibus,
if you're doing an omnibus bill, then incorporating, uh,
the removal of that, uh, exclusion under the contract
and Commercial Law Act would be, uh, would be valuable.
As well as, um, looking at other aspects of the CIR act
to make it clear that, uh, electronic, um,
versions, if the clerk of the house, uh, accepts
that they are valid, um, could be used instead of, um, uh,
pen and paper and printed forms.
So there are some factors like section two,
which has the interpretations if they could be made specific
so that, um, it doesn't, so that it's clear that that, uh,
electronic, uh, forms could be used.
So yeah, it's just an opportunity really
to improve the efficiency
and trustworthiness, I guess, of the parliamentary processes
and the, and, um,
and, uh, you know, enhance the effectiveness of them and,
and trust in government.
So that's the purpose of this bill,
and we'd like it to go a little bit further.
And the second, um, uh, piece
of our submission refers the Official Information Act,
which I guess these previous submitters were
talking about as well.
And, um, this relates to a piece of work that we're doing
around trying to improve, uh, think about ways to, uh,
protect the integrity of public policy making, um, through,
uh, having lobbying laws through, um, better management
of conflicts of interest,
but expanding the OIA, um,
legislation to cover, uh, aspects of, of parliament,
particularly the speaker with his ministerial
responsibilities, parliamentary services,
parliamentary service commission, um,
in the office of the clerk.
So I'm not across a lot of those details
and where the lines are drawn,
but I guess that's what, uh, the previous, uh,
presenters have been talking about.
But, um, I think that that is part of a transparent, um,
and trustworthy government.
So yeah, those are our two main points
and I'm happy to discuss any
comments or questions you might have.
Thank you. Are there any questions?
Um, I've got one that's a little bit
left field, if that's all right.
Um, hi, boy. Nice to see you. Hi.
Um, now I think you and I have had discussions
before about things like a register
of lobbyists, do you think?
Um, it's probably well
and truly outside the scope of this bill, but
The only thing, so I reckon go,
But, but yeah, as, as there have been many other things,
um, I mean, do you think something like
that would be helpful to improve trust in, um,
the legislative process and,
and the integrity of parliamentarians in particular?
Oh, absolutely. And that's really what we've been calling
for, uh, for a while.
We've done a piece of work, um, Matt,
Matt Rashbrook looked at other jurisdictions
and what they've done and New Zealand as an outlier
and having no lobbying laws whatsoever.
Um, the la the previous government started a process, um,
to look at that, uh,
and it ended up being watered down substantially to a,
a voluntary code, um, which these things never really work.
And that whole set of work has been abandoned really
by the Ministry of Justice.
Um, so I, when we looked into, uh,
what was needed in a, in a regulatory
or legislative way, there's no piece
of legis existing legislation that could be amended
to add on a lobby register
and, uh, restrictions on revolving doors, um, and so on.
Uh, we felt that it probably required its own piece
of legislation.
Um, but, um,
so I don't know whether it would fit within this, uh,
on omnibus bill or not,
but we are definitely, uh,
very keen on supporting lobbying regulations like most
WCD countries have.
Okay, thank you. Maria Menno, k Boyd, Maria Menno,
Kapai party, Maori, just, um, we listened to a really
interesting and full of life, uh, presenter
before Young Pacifica.
Um, he, him, she, them,
and, um, but they talked, what, what,
what we got was this real, um, we wanna get engaged,
we wanna know what's going on in this setting.
We have opinions about it.
We have, we've already had, I dunno,
it might have been a hundred, um, funnel to hear
what Pacifica Young are thinking about
and talking about in this, in, in this context.
They have their own thinking, their own solutions.
What, what, um, how do you, what would you say to that
and how would you, yeah, yeah.
What, what would you say to that
and how would we capitalize on that, I guess?
Well, thank, thanks for that.
And I think that comes, uh, I mean, there's lots of ways
to be able to do that,
but I do think this citizens initiated
referendum is a piece of existing legislation,
which is an important piece of our democratic structure,
which does allow, um, people to, um,
have their say in a way
that forces the government if there's enough signatures
to at least have a referendum on it.
So it's not, it's not forcing of it,
but it's another way of getting voice in.
I mean, personally, I'm, uh, I'm keen on these, um,
more like citizens juries, if you like,
where we have more deliberative, um, activities
that engage, uh, people by putting evidence in front
of them, getting them to debate it seriously, coming out
with recommendations.
I think that would improve our, our democracy.
Um, I don't quite know whether that would be kind
of legislated or whatever,
but, um, it's really just that this
citizens in initiated referenda, um,
was in this omnibus is in this omnibus bill,
and we just want to use, be able to use the opportunity,
it's one part of the myriad of structures, um, that we try
to bolster to give, uh, better, better voice
to people for our democracy.
Thank you. Okay, Paul,
Boy James, me here,
just following up on the initiate referendum point, given
that we, um, we have a representative democracy
and, uh, series of referendum have been held, uh,
with various results one way
or the other with no real outcome.
Mm-Hmm. Uh, is, is it not,
should we not just be relying on, um,
our representative officials
or elected representatives to make those decisions?
And if they make the wrong call to then vote them out
and get someone who will make a different decision rather
than try and have a, a, a mix of representative and,
and direct participatory democracy?
I, I just, I struggle sometimes to think that we put a lot
of effort into these things that end up being for almost
for, whereas there could be more focus
and pressure just put on the elected representatives
to do their job and represent who they're elected by.
And if they don't do the job
to get someone else to afford 'em.
Um, yeah. Thanks, thanks James for that, uh, question.
And, and I agree that that's, that's a fundamental part
of the, the contract, I guess, between us
and our elected, uh, representatives.
Um, in this particular case, um, I think we,
everybody was, uh, shocked by what did come out of the, out
of the coalition agreement because it wasn't campaigned upon
and it came out of left field.
Um, so that this is an instance where, um, our elected, uh,
representatives, um, uh, weren't kind
of quite clean with the, uh, with, with the public in terms
of what they were going to do.
And so, yep, that is a, the, the voting of, um,
of, of MPS is a fundamental process, but it's not perfect.
We do need other ways to be able to get democratic, um,
uh, voice to pieces of legislation.
I, I take your point, um, James about, uh, previous
referenda, which, um, have not necessarily got up.
Um, uh, and that may be the case.
And even if they have got up, um, uh, they, and,
and people support them in a refer in the referendum,
they're not binding.
So, yep. These are, these are all, um, uh, I guess,
uh, the bumps in the road of, of democracy,
but, uh, we still think it's a very important plank.
I mean, once you elect people,
and especially if we go into a four year term, um,
there needs to be mechanisms other than the once every three
or four year ballot box is my view.
I agree with that. Mm-Hmm.
Sorry to interrupt. I do agree with that last point. Yeah,
No, no, that's, that's all my I was gonna say.
Thanks point. Okay. Thanks. Thanks.
Any other questions? Thank you very
much for your submission.
Much appreciate it.
You all the best on your deliberations. Thanks for hearing
Us, Hilda.
Thank you. We now have Jeff
Neil from the fax.
Is that he hasn't joined the Zoom yet though,
saying he's on the way, right?
Well, we're a little bit, yeah. Unusually Mm-Hmm. I,
there is coffee in next door.
Well, I've got apologies from five 30 onwards.
And for the sake of not leaving halfway
through a submission, I'll excuse myself.
Um,
hopefully I'll coming up soon.
What we gonna be, we're gonna wait for this fellow instead.
Pause. Well, we are early.
He's not due until 5 35, so,
so you won't give us a five minute Yeah.
Will Oh, go on.
Two three
Kda. Um, Jeff, welcome
to the Parliament Bill Select Committee.
Uh, we've got, uh, 15 minutes with you.
Uh, we've read your submission
and look forward to your hearing from you, KDA.
Great. Thanks very much for the introduction
and sorry I couldn't be here sooner.
It's good that you're running ahead of time.
No problem. Uh, just firstly, can I confirm,
have you received my research file, Microsoft Excel?
Yes, the big, big, um,
You have a pdf d which is a bit messy to look at,
but I just wanted to see if you had my Excel file as well.
Yes. If not, I can send it through,
but that's got all of my research,
which if anyone's interested.
Yes, we we have it. Thank
You. Fantastic.
So as you can see,
I've been pretty busy researching many forms of petition
and, uh, referendum.
And that's what I'm wanting
to speak about today on behalf of the facts.nz.
And that includes, I've been looking at DIY petitions,
parliamentary petitions, Maori ward, uh, petitions
and referendums and citizens initiated
referendums and petitions.
Uh, I won't, I'll just highlight a couple of key points
because I think the questions is gonna be most important.
But as you can see, um, my proposal is,
or at the facts proposal is that digital, uh, sorry,
citizens initiated referendum should have, uh,
a 5% threshold like Maori wards
and they should allow digital signatures like, um,
parliamentary petitions.
And I have got one extra point that I haven't raised in my,
um, submission that I just thought about,
but it is increasingly difficult in society to, um,
I guess confront controversial issues, uh, in person.
There's a lot of violence risk.
So that's another reason why I think electronic
methods are superior.
There's some controversial topics.
If you tried to run physical petitions in a mall
or at a, uh, at a show, uh,
that would be quite dangerous to run.
So I think that leaves only, uh, an electronic method.
Uh, we have Maori 60 Maori ward referendums happening, um,
by the end of next year, there will be,
have been 60 in total.
The Swiss system has 60 referendums
for their people every year there.
60 questions across four referendums.
Uh, we haven't had a citizens initiated referendum
since 2012.
So the ci, the democratic system is failing us.
And no government initiated
referendums have happened since 2020.
So in the absence of us being able to do citizens initiated,
we haven't got government
and parliament putting forward referendums for us.
So we just don't have a strong democratic
voice between elections.
Um, there's also a lot
of vaguery in the Citizens Initiated Referendum Act.
The office of the clerk has said it's ambiguous whether
electronic forms are allowed and he won't rule on it.
Um, he would want, he would prefer a legislative change.
So that's kind of the summary of, I guess my submission
and that additional point around, uh, the safety risk
of trying to gather 369,000 signatures in person.
Um, there's a lot of topics I just would not want
to be trying to confront the public on, uh,
'cause of the, the violence risk.
So that's me. Um, I'll hand it over to questions.
Hopefully there's some
Okay. Members
questions for Oh, okay.
Hey Jeff, it's James being here.
Thanks, uh, good to see you again.
Um, you're probably not used to committees running earlier
on time 'cause you switch to justice very often.
And, um, obviously I need to learn a thing
or two about chairing from, uh, uh, I, I have some,
some questions about, uh, your views on referenda
and it being an integral part of the democratic process.
And I put this to the submitter before
and I, I appreciate you may not have, um, caught that point,
but don't we elect, uh, representatives for a reason
to go and make decisions on our behalf?
And I understand there is a significant amount of time
between lesions, but we, we do at some point have
to put enough, uh, delegate enough
that decision making responsibility to them
to make decisions on important issues.
And if, uh, we as legislators or decision makers
or governors get it wrong, then the public have the chance
to express their dissatisfaction at the election
by voting those, uh, representatives out.
And, um, at the risk of it, of putting in too much, well,
there's such things too much, but direct participation
or change in the kind of democratic makeup.
And it goes to your point around trying
to get citizens initiated, referee together
and the risk of going out there
and gathering submissions on quite, uh, heated
or controversial issues and the safety risk.
Doesn't that help demonstrate that point
that we then delegate that decision making responsibility
to elected representatives to make those decisions
and take the heat on our behalf?
It's a great question and I
understand where it's coming from.
Uh, I would argue that most voters are pretty shallow voters
and they don't look into policy, uh,
for the parties when they vote or don't look into mps.
A lot of it's based on feeling there's not many voters out
there that goes deep as I do and read everyone's policies
and say, and pick them apart.
So that's my my first point.
The second one is, um, I'll be honest, I do not think that,
um, all politicians are always representative of the people.
And I'm gonna pick on a few parties here with my examples,
but if we look at the labor gov LED government from 2020
to 2023 tried to merger TV NZ
and Radio New Zealand polling machine,
80% of people opposed.
It, there was a, uh, a movement to try
and reduce the voting age and polling showed 80%
of Kiwis opposed it.
Uh, the mandatory income insurance,
80% of people opposed it.
So that wasn't representative of the people.
And then if I turn it back on your party, James,
if we look at the, uh, the treaty, uh,
treaty principles bill, uh, polling has shown two
to one Kiwi support it,
but we've not got politicians reflecting that view
and we certainly don't have media reflecting that view.
So I would say on behalf of, uh, most voters, no,
we do not trust elected representatives
to accurately represent our wishes.
Final point there is, um, if we go back
to the 2020 referendums, I think
that the cannabis referendum very close, I think it was 52%
for 48, really important.
Um, just, just got, uh, uh,
just I guess the nos just won it.
And then the end of life choice bill, pretty comprehensive,
two to one 67% I think preferred it.
So I think it's a great example of why referendums work
and why we can't rely solely on elected representatives.
I stop on that. I just wanna pick up on Yeah, sure.
So just one on one point you made Jeff,
and I think it's a, a reasonable point.
You said that, um, a lot of voters or some voters,
or most voters maybe, I can't remember
how you characterize it, um, are shallow and,
and don't have, um, don't look into policies.
And I, I would agree I wouldn't use that term,
but I think a lot of voters are busy running their own lives
and having things to worry about that they don't get time
or don't, they don't concern themselves with it.
But wouldn't that lend weight to the, the point
that we shouldn't govern by referendum
because it's asking people to, uh, go
and make a decision on a topic that, on a specific topic
or issue that they haven't given much thought to.
And actually we've elected 120 odd people whose job it is
to sit there and, and quite carefully
and see, you might think that some
of us don't give it careful consideration,
which is maybe fair criticism,
but it, it eventually we are asked
to carefully consider a topic
and make a call on, uh, the public's behalf.
Do you have any comments to make on that?
And then I'll close off.
Yeah. Uh, two thoughts, uh, two examples I suppose,
which helped to answer it, I think, um,
to support your argument, which is not what I'm here for.
But, um, if you, if you look at Brexit,
that was a great example
of it shouldn't have gone to referendum so fast.
It was very complex
and even the experts didn't understand the implications.
And so that's a great example of
where referendums don't work.
I agree. You need discourse
and sometimes something might just be so hard
the the common voter just we should not have a vote on it.
And I think my second point is,
if you look at the koi in recent days,
and you look at those who did interviews
of the people in the Koi, um, it is very clear
that the level of knowledge of
what was happening was very low.
Most of them that had got interviewed
that I've seen hadn't read the bill.
Um, and hardly any knew
that National New Zealand first had already very clearly
stated that they will not be passing at the next reading.
So these, there's a great example of readers not being,
I guess I've got a foot in both camps there,
sometimes referendums don't work,
but also, um, voters are not informed enough
to elect representatives accurately. Um, I
Think that valid points no,
I I tend to agree with a lot of that too. Thanks Jeff.
Thank you. Would That be true of the people that have
that support the bill as well?
Uh, can you just elaborate please on that point? Well,
You, you've said that those who are against yes.
What you're saying. Oh, totally, totally.
And um, now I might, I might mess up this word,
but if you look at um, au Ranga for example,
how many Kiwis understand what that means and, and,
and going back to the, the start of the treaty.
So it's a very valid point is that we do need
to have some discourse around that.
Um, uh, you know,
and that current polling is shown two
to one kiwi support the treaty principles bill, right?
Um, so that's a classic example.
'cause it is the bill, it says it should go to referendum.
It should it go to referendum.
Um, it's a great dis debating point I would say.
There's, there's tackling quite a complex thing.
I think if you go back, there's some ref,
and I'll use the Brexit example, if there's a scale,
the Brexit examples at the extreme end of complex
probably maybe treaty is up there,
the treaty principles bill, maybe that's up there.
Or maybe actually it's not.
Um, but there's simpler things like, um, if we go back
to cannabis or if we go back to end of life choice,
they would probably simpler
concepts for people to get their
heads around. No, they, well,
The end of life, I, I would, yeah.
Thank you Jeff. I'll just make,
I mean on the, on the cannabis.
So there was no legislation that people were having a chance
to vote on, which did increase the complication quite a bit.
But my question actually is about the, uh, the risk
that people pose trying to collect signatures.
Um, do you think that there is actually a benefit in,
in people getting out in front of each other
and making a case and having discourse face to face
and collecting signatures for a petition, uh, as opposed
to just collecting it online, um,
and not having that discussed,
leaving into people becoming more knowledgeable
of the issue which they're actually talking about?
Yeah. And you're talking to someone
who does focus group research, right?
So I, I hold this for my clients
and I get people in a room to discuss these things.
So that, that is a valid point. And I'm a big supporter.
I believe everyone running to be an MP must,
should run an electorate and should face the people.
And I don't believe in parties setting party lists.
I think it should be based partially on what the people, um,
of votes from the people.
So I I I do hear what you're saying without argument. Sorry,
I was clearly, mine was actually about
the referendum signature.
Oh no, totally. I hear you.
But I guess I'm using that as an analogy
of I guess being representative
of the people getting out there at the
coalface talking to people,
Which means you'd be more in favor
of collecting written signatures than electronic signatures.
Oh, a physical signature is worth more than
an electronic signature.
Yes. Um, and, um, but you know, I guess we live in 2024
and one of the points in my submission was if it's 10%
of voters, which I think is 369,000,
maybe it's 360 6, I can't remember.
That is a hell of a lot.
And in a digital age,
maybe 2012 doing an asset sales referendum, um, I, sorry, a,
a petition, a citizen initiated referend a petition to try
and get to the referendum and you've got, you know,
union back and you can use their databases.
Maybe you can get to 280,000 or whatever it is at time,
but now three 69,000 in 2024, it's almost impossible.
Um, and I'd say that if, uh, choose another example.
If you look at the Green Party
and their banned conversion therapy petition,
they've got 160,000 signatures.
They got 20,000 in one day at big gay out.
Now that's a very friendly environment where for, for
that bill where there wasn't much threat.
But if you're gonna go out and try
and do a referendum on, uh, abortion
or Maori seats, uh, for example, you are gonna,
you're probably gonna get beaten up in today's climate.
So how can a citizen put these concepts forward,
even if they're supported by the majority of people?
And they were just examples.
Not things I'm saying I support,
but just I guess controversial topics.
Um, how can we possibly go out there
and capture 370,000 signatures safely?
Any other questions? No, no, no.
We don't have any other questions for you.
But, um, thank you again
for the detailed information
that you've given us. Thank you.
Uh, you're most welcome. And just to go back
to my first point, um, if you haven't got it
and you do want it, I've done comprehensive research
with the clerk on all
of the citizens initiated referendum
since the act was passed.
Uh, and welcome to Happy to share it.
You can use it however you please. Good.
I've got the same information from Maori wards too,
so if anyone wants that and
that's not been published either.
Oh, okay. Thank you for that. Thank you.